PREFACE


I am writing this to relieve my mind. It is not malice alone which makes
me praise Bizet at the expense of Wagner in this essay. Amid a good deal
of jesting I wish to make one point clear which does not admit of levity.
To turn my back on Wagner was for me a piece of fate, to get to like
anything else whatever afterwards was for me a triumph. Nobody, perhaps,
had ever been more dangerously involved in Wagnerism, nobody had defended
himself more obstinately against it, nobody had ever been so overjoyed at
ridding himself of it. A long history!--Shall I give it a name?--If I were a
moralist, who knows what I might not call it! Perhaps a piece of
_self-mastery_.--But the philosopher does not like the moralist, neither
does he like high-falutin' words....

What is the first and last thing that a philosopher demands of himself? To
overcome his age in himself, to become "timeless." With what then does the
philosopher have the greatest fight? With all that in him which makes him
the child of his time. Very well then! I am just as much a child of my age
as Wagner--_i.e._, I am a decadent. The only difference is that I
recognised the fact, that I struggled against it. The philosopher in me
struggled against it.

My greatest preoccupation hitherto has been the problem of _decadence_,
and I had reasons for this. "Good and evil" form only a playful
subdivision of this problem. If one has trained one's eye to detect the
symptoms of decline, one also understands morality,--one understands what
lies concealed beneath its holiest names and tables of values: _e.g._,
_impoverished_ life, the will to nonentity, great exhaustion. Morality
_denies_ life.... In order to undertake such a mission I was obliged to
exercise self-discipline:--I had to side against all that was morbid in
myself including Wagner, including Schopenhauer, including the whole of
modern _humanity_.--A profound estrangement, coldness and soberness towards
all that belongs to my age, all that was contemporary: and as the highest
wish, Zarathustra's eye, an eye which surveys the whole
phenomenon--mankind--from an enormous distance,--which looks down upon
it.--For such a goal--what sacrifice would not have been worth while? What
"self-mastery"! What "self-denial"!

The greatest event of my life took the form of a _recovery_. Wagner
belongs only to my diseases.

Not that I wish to appear ungrateful to this disease. If in this essay I
support the proposition that Wagner is _harmful_, I none the less wish to
point out unto whom, in spite of all, he is indispensable--to the
philosopher. Anyone else may perhaps be able to get on without Wagner: but
the philosopher is not free to pass him by. The philosopher must be the
evil conscience of his age,--but to this end he must be possessed of its
best knowledge. And what better guide, or more thoroughly efficient
revealer of the soul, could be found for the labyrinth of the modern
spirit than Wagner? Through Wagner modernity speaks her most intimate
language: it conceals neither its good nor its evil: it has thrown off all
shame. And, conversely, one has almost calculated the whole of the value
of modernity once one is clear concerning what is good and evil in Wagner.
I can perfectly well understand a musician of to-day who says: "I hate
Wagner but I can endure no other music." But I should also understand a
philosopher who said, "Wagner is modernity in concentrated form." There is
no help for it, we must first be Wagnerites....




1.


Yesterday--would you believe it?--I heard _Bizet's_ masterpiece for the
twentieth time. Once more I attended with the same gentle reverence; once
again I did not run away. This triumph over my impatience surprises me.
How such a work completes one! Through it one almost becomes a
"masterpiece" oneself--And, as a matter of fact, each time I heard _Carmen_
it seemed to me that I was more of a philosopher, a better philosopher
than at other times: I became so forbearing, so happy, so Indian, so
_settled_.... To sit for five hours: the first step to holiness!--May I be
allowed to say that Bizet's orchestration is the only one that I can
endure now? That other orchestration which is all the rage at present--the
Wagnerian--is brutal, artificial and "unsophisticated" withal, hence its
appeal to all the three senses of the modern soul at once. How terribly
Wagnerian orchestration affects me! I call it the _Sirocco_. A
disagreeable sweat breaks out all over me. All my fine weather vanishes.

Bizet's music seems to me perfect. It comes forward lightly, gracefully,
stylishly. It is lovable, it does not sweat. "All that is good is easy,
everything divine runs with light feet": this is the first principle of my
aesthetics. This music is wicked, refined, fatalistic, and withal remains
popular,--it possesses the refinement of a race, not of an individual. It
is rich. It is definite. It builds, organises, completes, and in this
sense it stands as a contrast to the polypus in music, to "endless
melody". Have more painful, more tragic accents ever been heard on the
stage before? And how are they obtained? Without grimaces! Without
counterfeiting of any kind! Free from the _lie_ of the grand style!--In
short: this music assumes that the listener is intelligent even as a
musician,--thereby it is the opposite of Wagner, who, apart from everything
else, was in any case the most _ill-mannered_ genius on earth (Wagner
takes us as if ... , he repeats a thing so often that we become
desperate,--that we ultimately believe it).

And once more: I become a better man when Bizet speaks to me. Also a
better musician, a better _listener_. Is it in any way possible to listen
better?--I even burrow behind this music with my ears. I hear its very
cause. I seem to assist at its birth. I tremble before the dangers which
this daring music runs, I am enraptured over those happy accidents for
which even Bizet himself may not be responsible.--And, strange to say, at
bottom I do not give it a thought, or am not aware how much thought I
really do give it. For quite other ideas are running through my head the
while.... Has any one ever observed that music _emancipates_ the spirit?
gives wings to thought? and that the more one becomes a musician the more
one is also a philosopher? The grey sky of abstraction seems thrilled by
flashes of lightning; the light is strong enough to reveal all the details
of things; to enable one to grapple with problems; and the world is
surveyed as if from a mountain top--With this I have defined philosophical
pathos--And unexpectedly _answers_ drop into my lap, a small hailstorm of
ice and wisdom, of problems _solved_. Where am I? Bizet makes me
productive. Everything that is good makes me productive. I have gratitude
for nothing else, nor have I any other touchstone for testing what is
good.




2.


Bizet's work also saves; Wagner is not the only "Saviour." With it one
bids farewell to the _damp_ north and to all the fog of the Wagnerian
ideal. Even the action in itself delivers us from these things. From
Merimee it has this logic even in passion, from him it has the direct
line, _inexorable_ necessity, but what it has above all else is that which
belongs to sub-tropical zones--that dryness of atmosphere, that
_limpidezza_ of the air. Here in every respect the climate is altered.
Here another kind of sensuality, another kind of sensitiveness and another
kind of cheerfulness make their appeal. This music is gay, but not in a
French or German way. Its gaiety is African; fate hangs over it, its
happiness is short, sudden, without reprieve. I envy Bizet for having had
the courage of this sensitiveness, which hitherto in the cultured music of
Europe has found no means of expression,--of this southern, tawny, sunburnt
sensitiveness.... What a joy the golden afternoon of its happiness is to us!
When we look out, with this music in our minds, we wonder whether we have
ever seen the sea so _calm_. And how soothing is this Moorish dancing!
How, for once, even our insatiability gets sated by its lascivious
melancholy!--And finally love, love translated back into _Nature_! Not the
love of a "cultured girl!"--no Senta-sentimentality.(7) But love as fate,
as a fatality, cynical, innocent, cruel,--and precisely in this way
_Nature_! The love whose means is war, whose very essence is the _mortal
hatred_ between the sexes!--I know no case in which the tragic irony, which
constitutes the kernel of love, is expressed with such severity, or in so
terrible a formula, as in the last cry of Don Jose with which the work
ends:

"Yes, it is I who have killed her,
I--my adored Carmen!"

--Such a conception of love (the only one worthy of a philosopher) is rare:
it distinguishes one work of art from among a thousand others. For, as a
rule, artists are no better than the rest of the world, they are even
worse--they _misunderstand_ love. Even Wagner misunderstood it. They
imagine that they are selfless in it because they appear to be seeking the
advantage of another creature often to their own disadvantage. But in
return they want to _possess_ the other creature.... Even God is no
exception to this rule, he is very far from thinking "What does it matter
to thee whether I love thee or not?"--He becomes terrible if he is not
loved in return "_L'amour_--and with this principle one carries one's point
against Gods and men--_est de tous les sentiments le plus egoiste, et par
consequent, lorsqu'il est blesse, le moins genereux_" (B. Constant).




3.


Perhaps you are beginning to perceive how very much this music _improves_
me?--_Il faut mediterraniser la musique._ and I have my reasons for this
principle ("Beyond Good and Evil," pp. 216 _et seq._) The return to
Nature, health, good spirits, youth, _virtue_!--And yet I was one of the
most corrupted Wagnerites.... I was able to take Wagner seriously. Oh, this
old magician! what tricks has he not played upon us! The first thing his
art places in our hands is a magnifying glass: we look through it, and we
no longer trust our own eyes--Everything grows bigger, _even Wagner grows
bigger_.... What a clever rattlesnake. Throughout his life he rattled
"resignation," "loyalty," and "purity" about our ears, and he retired from
the _corrupt_ world with a song of praise to chastity!--And we believed it
all....

--But you will not listen to me? You _prefer_ even the _problem_ of Wagner
to that of Bizet? But neither do I underrate it; it has its charm. The
problem of salvation is even a venerable problem. Wagner pondered over
nothing so deeply as over salvation: his opera is the opera of salvation.
Someone always wants to be saved in his operas,--now it is a youth; anon it
is a maid,--this is _his problem_--And how lavishly he varies his
_leitmotif_! What rare and melancholy modulations! If it were not for
Wagner, who would teach us that innocence has a preference for saving
interesting sinners? (the case in "Tannhauser"). Or that even the eternal
Jew gets saved and _settled down_ when he marries? (the case in the
"Flying Dutchman"). Or that corrupted old females prefer to be saved by
chaste young men? (the case of Kundry). Or that young hysterics like to be
saved by their doctor? (the case in "Lohengrin"). Or that beautiful girls
most love to be saved by a knight who also happens to be a Wagnerite? (the
case in the "Mastersingers"). Or that even married women also like to be
saved by a knight? (the case of Isolde). Or that the venerable Almighty,
after having compromised himself morally in all manner of ways, is at last
delivered by a free spirit and an immoralist? (the case in the "Ring").
Admire, more especially this last piece of wisdom! Do you understand it?
I--take good care not to understand it.... That it is possible to draw yet
other lessons from the works above mentioned,--I am much more ready to
prove than to dispute. That one may be driven by a Wagnerian ballet to
desperation--_and_ to virtue! (once again the case in "Tannhauser"). That
not going to bed at the right time may be followed by the worst
consequences (once again the case of "Lohengrin").--That one can never be
too sure of the spouse one actually marries (for the third time, the case
of "Lohengrin"). "Tristan and Isolde" glorifies the perfect husband who,
in a certain case, can ask only one question: "But why have ye not told me
this before? Nothing could be simpler than that!" Reply:

"That I cannot tell thee.
And what thou askest,
That wilt thou never learn."

"Lohengrin" contains a solemn ban upon all investigation and questioning.
In this way Wagner stood for the Christian concept, "Thou must and shalt
_believe_". It is a crime against the highest and the holiest to be
scientific.... The "Flying Dutchman" preaches the sublime doctrine that
woman can moor the most erratic soul, or to put it into Wagnerian terms
"save" him. Here we venture to ask a question. Supposing that this were
actually true, would it therefore be desirable?--What becomes of the
"eternal Jew" whom a woman adores and _enchains_? He simply ceases from
being eternal, he marries,--that is to say, he concerns us no
longer.--Transferred into the realm of reality, the danger for the artist
and for the genius--and these are of course the "eternal Jews"--resides in
woman: _adoring_ women are their ruin. Scarcely any one has sufficient
character not to be corrupted--"saved" when he finds himself treated as a
God--he then immediately condescends to woman.--Man is a coward in the face
of all that is eternally feminine, and this the girls know.--In many cases
of woman's love, and perhaps precisely in the most famous ones, the love
is no more than a refined form of _parasitism_, a making one's nest in
another's soul and sometimes even in another's flesh--Ah! and how
constantly at the cost of the host!

We know the fate of Goethe in old-maidish moralin-corroded Germany. He was
always offensive to Germans, he found honest admirers only among Jewesses.
Schiller, "noble" Schiller, who cried flowery words into their ears,--he
was a man after their own heart. What did they reproach Goethe with?--with
the Mount of Venus, and with having composed certain Venetian epigrams.
Even Klopstock preached him a moral sermon; there was a time when Herder
was fond of using the word "Priapus" when he spoke of Goethe. Even
"Wilhelm Meister" seemed to be only a symptom of decline, of a moral
"going to the dogs". The "Menagerie of tame cattle," the worthlessness of
the hero in this book, revolted Niebuhr, who finally bursts out in a
plaint which _Biterolf_(8) might well have sung: "nothing so easily makes
a painful impression as _when a great mind despoils itself of its wings
and strives for virtuosity in something greatly inferior, while it
renounces more lofty aims_." But the most indignant of all was the
cultured woman--all smaller courts in Germany, every kind of "Puritanism"
made the sign of the cross at the sight of Goethe, at the thought of the
"unclean spirit" in Goethe.--This history was what Wagner set to music. He
_saves_ Goethe, that goes without saying; but he does so in such a clever
way that he also takes the side of the cultured woman. Goethe gets saved:
a prayer saves him, a cultured woman _draws him out of the mire_.

--As to what Goethe would have thought of Wagner?--Goethe once set himself
the question, "what danger hangs over all romanticists--the fate of
romanticists?"--His answer was: "To choke over the rumination of moral and
religious absurdities." In short: _Parsifal_.... The philosopher writes
thereto an epilogue: _Holiness_--the only remaining higher value still seen
by the mob or by woman, the horizon of the ideal for all those who are
naturally short-sighted. To philosophers, however, this horizon, like
every other, is a mere misunderstanding, a sort of slamming of the door in
the face of the real beginning of their world,--their danger, their ideal,
their desideratum.... In more polite language: _La philosophie ne suffit pas
au grand nombre. Il lui faut la saintete...._




4.


I shall once more relate the history of the "Ring". This is its proper
place. It is also the history of a salvation except that in this case it
is Wagner himself who is saved--Half his lifetime Wagner believed in the
_Revolution_ as only a Frenchman could have believed in it. He sought it
in the runic inscriptions of myths, he thought he had found a typical
revolutionary in Siegfried.--"Whence arises all the evil in this world?"
Wagner asked himself. From "old contracts": he replied, as all
revolutionary ideologists have done. In plain English: from customs, laws,
morals, institutions, from all those things upon which the ancient world
and ancient society rests. "How can one get rid of the evil in this world?
How can one get rid of ancient society?" Only by declaring war against
"contracts" (traditions, morality). _This Siegfried does._ He starts early
at the game, very early--his origin itself is already a declaration of war
against morality--he is the result of adultery, of incest.... Not the saga,
but Wagner himself is the inventor of this radical feature, in this matter
he _corrected_ the saga.... Siegfried continues as he began: he follows only
his first impulse, he flings all tradition, all respect, all _fear_ to the
winds. Whatever displeases him he strikes down. He tilts irreverently at
old god-heads. His principal undertaking, however, is to emancipate
woman,--"to deliver Brunnhilda."... Siegfried and Brunnhilda, the sacrament
of free love, the dawn of the golden age, the twilight of the Gods of old
morality--_evil is got rid of_.... For a long while Wagner's ship sailed
happily along this course. There can be no doubt that along it Wagner
sought his highest goal.--What happened? A misfortune. The ship dashed on
to a reef; Wagner had run aground. The reef was Schopenhauer's philosophy;
Wagner had stuck fast on a _contrary_ view of the world. What had he set
to music? Optimism? Wagner was ashamed. It was moreover an optimism for
which Schopenhauer had devised an evil expression,--_unscrupulous_
optimism. He was more than ever ashamed. He reflected for some time; his
position seemed desperate.... At last a path of escape seemed gradually to
open before him--what if the reef on which he had been wrecked could be
interpreted as a goal, as the ulterior motive, as the actual purpose of
his journey? To be wrecked here, this was also a goal:--_Bene navigavi cum
naufragium feci_ ... and he translated the "Ring" into Schopenhauerian
language. Everything goes wrong, everything goes to wrack and ruin, the
new world is just as bad as the old one:--Nonentity, the Indian Circe
beckons ... Brunnhilda, who according to the old plan had to retire with a
song in honour of free love, consoling the world with the hope of a
socialistic Utopia in which "all will be well"; now gets something else to
do. She must first study Schopenhauer. She must first versify the fourth
book of "The World as Will and Idea." _Wagner was saved...._ Joking apart,
this _was_ a salvation. The service which Wagner owes to Schopenhauer is
incalculable. It was the _philosopher of decadence_ who allowed the
_artist of decadence_ to find himself.--




5.


_The artist of decadence._ That is the word. And here I begin to be
serious. I could not think of looking on approvingly while this _decadent_
spoils our health--and music into the bargain. Is Wagner a man at all? Is
he not rather a disease? Everything he touches he contaminates. _He has
made music sick._

A typical _decadent_ who thinks himself necessary with his corrupted
taste, who arrogates to himself a higher taste, who tries to establish his
depravity as a law, as progress, as a fulfilment.

And no one guards against it. His powers of seduction attain monstrous
proportions, holy incense hangs around him, the misunderstanding
concerning him is called the Gospel,--and he has certainly not converted
only the _poor in spirit_ to his cause!

I should like to open the window a little:--Air! More air!--

The fact that people in Germany deceive themselves concerning Wagner does
not surprise me. The reverse would surprise me. The Germans have modelled
a Wagner for themselves, whom they can honour: never yet have they been
psychologists; they are thankful that they misunderstand. But that people
should also deceive themselves concerning Wagner in Paris! Where people
are scarcely anything else than psychologists. And in Saint Petersburg!
Where things are divined, which even Paris has no idea of. How intimately
related must Wagner be to the entire decadence of Europe for her not to
have felt that he was decadent! He belongs to it, he is its protagonist,
its greatest name.... We bring honour on ourselves by elevating him to the
clouds--For the mere fact that no one guards against him is in itself
already a sign of decadence. Instinct is weakened, what ought to be
eschewed now attracts. People actually kiss that which plunges them more
quickly into the abyss.--Is there any need for an example? One has only to
think of the regime which anaemic, or gouty, or diabetic people prescribe
for themselves. The definition of a vegetarian: a creature who has need of
a corroborating diet. To recognise what is harmful as harmful, to be able
to deny oneself what is harmful, is a sign of youth, of vitality. That
which is harmful lures the exhausted: cabbage lures the vegetarian.
Illness itself can be a stimulus to life but one must be healthy enough
for such a stimulus!--Wagner increases exhaustion--_therefore_ he attracts
the weak and exhausted to him. Oh, the rattlesnake joy of the old Master
precisely because he always saw "the little children" coming unto him!

I place this point of view first and foremost: Wagner's art is diseased.
The problems he sets on the stage are all concerned with hysteria; the
convulsiveness of his emotions, his over-excited sensitiveness, his taste
which demands ever sharper condimentation, his erraticness which he togged
out to look like principles, and, last but not least, his choice of heroes
and heroines, considered as physiological types (--a hospital ward!--): the
whole represents a morbid picture; of this there can be no doubt. _Wagner
est une nevrose_. Maybe, that nothing is better known to-day, or in any
case the subject of greater study, than the Protean character of
degeneration which has disguised itself here, both as an art and as an
artist. In Wagner our medical men and physiologists have a most
interesting case, or at least a very complete one. Owing to the very fact
that nothing is more modern than this thorough morbidness, this
dilatoriness and excessive irritability of the nervous machinery, Wagner
is the _modern artist par excellence_, the Cagliostro of modernity. All
that the world most needs to-day, is combined in the most seductive manner
in his art,--the three great stimulants of exhausted people: _brutality_,
_artificiality_ and _innocence_ (idiocy).

Wagner is a great corrupter of music. With it, he found the means of
stimulating tired nerves,--and in this way he made music ill. In the art of
spurring exhausted creatures back into activity, and of recalling
half-corpses to life, the inventiveness he shows is of no mean order. He
is the master of hypnotic trickery, and he fells the strongest like
bullocks. Wagner's _success_--his success with nerves, and therefore with
women--converted the whole world of ambitious musicians into disciples of
his secret art. And not only the ambitious, but also the _shrewd_.... Only
with morbid music can money be made to-day; our big theatres live on
Wagner.




6.


--Once more I will venture to indulge in a little levity. Let us suppose
that Wagner's _success_ could become flesh and blood and assume a human
form; that, dressed up as a good-natured musical savant, it could move
among budding artists. How do you think it would then be likely to express
itself?--

My friends, it would say, let us exchange a word or two in private. It is
easier to compose bad music than good music. But what, if apart from this
it were also more profitable, more effective, more convincing, more
exalting, more secure, more _Wagnerian_?... _Pulchrum est paucorum hominum._
Bad enough in all conscience! We understand Latin, and perhaps we also
understand which side our bread is buttered. Beauty has its drawbacks: we
know that. Wherefore beauty then? Why not rather aim at size, at the
sublime, the gigantic, that which moves the _masses_?--And to repeat, it is
easier to be titanic than to be beautiful; we know that....

We know the masses, we know the theatre. The best of those who assemble
there,--German youths, horned Siegfrieds and other Wagnerites, require the
sublime, the profound, and the overwhelming. This much still lies within
our power. And as for the others who assemble there,--the cultured
_cretins_, the _blase_ pigmies, the eternally feminine, the gastrically
happy, in short the people--they also require the sublime, the profound,
the overwhelming. All these people argue in the same way. "He who
overthrows us is strong; he who elevates us is godly; he who makes us
wonder vaguely is profound."--Let us make up our mind then, my friends in
music: we do want to overthrow them, we do want to elevate them, we do
want to make them wonder vaguely. This much still lies within our powers.

In regard to the process of making them wonder: it is here that our notion
of "style" finds its starting-point. Above all, no thoughts! Nothing is
more compromising than a thought! But the state of mind which _precedes_
thought, the labour of the thought still unborn, the promise of future
thought, the world as it was before God created it--a recrudescence of
chaos.... Chaos makes people wonder....

In the words of the master: infinity but without melody.

In the second place, with regard to the overthrowing,--this belongs at
least in part, to physiology. Let us, in the first place, examine the
instruments. A few of them would convince even our intestines (--they
_throw open_ doors, as Handel would say), others becharm our very marrow.
The _colour of the melody is_ all-important here, _the melody itself_ is
of no importance. Let us be precise about _this_ point. To what other
purpose should we spend our strength? Let us be characteristic in tone
even to the point of foolishness! If by means of tones we allow plenty of
scope for guessing, this will be put to the credit of our intellects. Let
us irritate nerves, let us strike them dead: let us handle thunder and
lightning,--that is what overthrows....

But what overthrows best, is _passion_.--We must try and be clear
concerning this question of passion. Nothing is cheaper than passion! All
the virtues of counterpoint may be dispensed with, there is no need to
have learnt anything,--but passion is always within our reach! Beauty is
difficult: let us beware of beauty!... And also of _melody!_ However much in
earnest we may otherwise be about the ideal, let us slander, my friends,
let us slander,--let us slander melody! Nothing is more dangerous than a
beautiful melody! Nothing is more certain to ruin taste! My friends, if
people again set about loving beautiful melodies, we are lost!...

_First principle_: melody is immoral. _Proof_: "Palestrina".
_Application_: "Parsifal." The absence of melody is in itself
sanctifying....

And this is the definition of passion. Passion--or the acrobatic feats of
ugliness on the tight-rope of enharmonic--My friends, let us dare to be
ugly! Wagner dared it! Let us heave the mud of the most repulsive
harmonies undauntedly before us. We must not even spare our hands! Only
thus, shall we become _natural_....

And now a last word of advice. Perhaps it covers everything--_Let us be
idealists!_--If not the cleverest, it is at least the wisest thing we can
do. In order to elevate men we ourselves must be exalted. Let us wander in
the clouds, let us harangue eternity, let us be careful to group great
symbols all around us! _Sursum! Bumbum!_--there is no better advice. The
"heaving breast" shall be our argument, "beautiful feelings" our
advocates. Virtue still carries its point against counterpoint. "How could
he who improves us, help being better than we?" man has ever thought thus.
Let us therefore improve mankind!--in this way we shall become good (in
this way we shall even become "classics"--Schiller became a "classic"). The
straining after the base excitement of the senses, after so-called beauty,
shattered the nerves of the Italians: let us remain German! Even Mozart's
relation to music--Wagner spoke this word of comfort to us--was at bottom
frivolous....

Never let us acknowledge that music "may be a recreation," that it may
"enliven," that it may "give pleasure." _Never let us give pleasure!_--we
shall be lost if people once again think of music hedonistically.... That
belongs to the bad eighteenth century.... On the other hand, nothing would
be more advisable (between ourselves) than a dose of--_cant, sit venia
verbo_. This imparts dignity.--And let us take care to select the precise
moment when it would be fitting to have black looks, to sigh openly, to
sigh devoutly, to flaunt grand Christian sympathy before their eyes. "Man
is corrupt who will save him? _what will save him?_" Do not let us reply.
We must be on our guard. We must control our ambition, which would bid us
found new religions. But no one must doubt that it is _we_ who save him,
that in _our_ music alone salvation is to be found.... (See Wagner's essay,
"Religion and Art.")




7.


Enough! Enough! I fear that, beneath all my merry jests, you are beginning
to recognise the sinister truth only too clearly--the picture of the
decline of art, of the decline of the artist. The latter, which is a
decline of character, might perhaps be defined provisionally in the
following manner: the musician is now becoming an actor, his art is
developing ever more and more into a talent for _telling lies_. In a
certain chapter of my principal work which bears the title "Concerning the
Physiology of Art,"(9) I shall have an opportunity of showing more
thoroughly how this transformation of art as a whole into histrionics is
just as much a sign of physiological degeneration (or more precisely a
form of hysteria), as any other individual corruption, and infirmity
peculiar to the art which Wagner inaugurated: for instance the
restlessness of its optics, which makes it necessary to change one's
attitude to it every second. They understand nothing of Wagner who see in
him but a sport of nature, an arbitrary mood, a chapter of accidents. He
was not the "defective," "ill-fated," "contradictory" genius that people
have declared him to be. Wagner was something _complete_, he was a typical
_decadent_, in whom every sign of "free will" was lacking, in whom every
feature was necessary. If there is anything at all of interest in Wagner,
it is the consistency with which a critical physiological condition may
convert itself, step by step, conclusion after conclusion, into a method,
a form of procedure, a reform of all principles, a crisis in taste.

At this point I shall only stop to consider the question of _style_. How
is _decadence_ in _literature_ characterised? By the fact that in it life
no longer animates the whole. Words become predominant and leap right out
of the sentence to which they belong, the sentences themselves trespass
beyond their bounds, and obscure the sense of the whole page, and the page
in its turn gains in vigour at the cost of the whole,--the whole is no
longer a whole. But this is the formula for every decadent style: there is
always anarchy among the atoms, disaggregation of the will,--in moral
terms: "freedom of the individual,"--extended into a political theory
"_equal_ rights for all." Life, equal vitality, all the vibration and
exuberance of life, driven back into the smallest structure, and the
remainder left almost lifeless. Everywhere paralysis, distress, and
numbness, or hostility and chaos both striking one with ever increasing
force the higher the forms of organisation are into which one ascends. The
whole no longer lives at all: it is composed, reckoned up, artificial, a
fictitious thing.

In Wagner's case the first thing we notice is an hallucination, not of
tones, but of attitudes. Only after he has the latter does he begin to
seek the semiotics of tone for them. If we wish to admire him, we should
observe him at work here: how he separates and distinguishes, how he
arrives at small unities, and how he galvanises them, accentuates them,
and brings them into pre-eminence. But in this way he exhausts his
strength the rest is worthless. How paltry, awkward, and amateurish is his
manner of "developing," his attempt at combining incompatible parts. His
manner in this respect reminds one of two people who even in other ways
are not unlike him in style--the brothers Goncourt; one almost feels
compassion for so much impotence. That Wagner disguised his inability to
create organic forms, under the cloak of a principle, that he should have
constructed a "dramatic style" out of what we should call the total
inability to create any style whatsoever, is quite in keeping with that
daring habit, which stuck to him throughout his life, of setting up a
principle wherever capacity failed him. (In this respect he was very
different from old Kant, who rejoiced in another form of daring, _i.e._:
whenever a principle failed him, he endowed man with a "capacity" which
took its place...) Once more let it be said that Wagner is really only
worthy of admiration and love by virtue of his inventiveness in small
things, in his elaboration of details,--here one is quite justified in
proclaiming him a master of the first rank, as our greatest musical
_miniaturist_ who compresses an infinity of meaning and sweetness into the
smallest space. His wealth of colour, of chiaroscuro, of the mystery of a
dying light, so pampers our senses that afterwards almost every other
musician strikes us as being too robust. If people would believe me, they
would not form the highest idea of Wagner from that which pleases them in
him to-day. All that was only devised for convincing the masses, and
people like ourselves recoil from it just as one would recoil from too
garish a fresco. What concern have we with the irritating brutality of the
overture to the "Tannhauser"? Or with the Walkyrie Circus? Whatever has
become popular in Wagner's art, including that which has become so outside
the theatre, is in bad taste and spoils taste. The "Tannhauser" March
seems to me to savour of the Philistine; the overture to the "Flying
Dutchman" is much ado about nothing; the prelude to "Lohengrin" was the
first, only too insidious, only too successful example of how one can
hypnotise with music (--I dislike all music which aspires to nothing higher
than to convince the nerves). But apart from the Wagner who paints
frescoes and practises magnetism, there is yet another Wagner who hoards
small treasures: our greatest melancholic in music, full of side glances,
loving speeches, and words of comfort, in which no one ever forestalled
him,--the tone-master of melancholy and drowsy happiness.... A lexicon of
Wagner's most intimate phrases--a host of short fragments of from five to
fifteen bars each, of music which _nobody knows_.... Wagner had the virtue
of _decadents_,--pity....




8.


--"Very good! But how can this _decadent_ spoil one's taste if perchance
one is not a musician, if perchance one is not oneself a
_decadent_?"--Conversely! How can one _help_ it! _Just_ you try it!--You
know not what Wagner is: quite a great actor! Does a more profound, a more
_ponderous_ influence exist on the stage? Just look at these
youthlets,--all benumbed, pale, breathless! They are Wagnerites: they know
nothing about music,--and yet Wagner gets the mastery of them. Wagner's art
presses with the weight of a hundred atmospheres: do but submit, there is
nothing else to do.... Wagner the actor is a tyrant, his pathos flings all
taste, all resistance, to the winds.

--Who else has this persuasive power in his attitudes, who else sees
attitudes so clearly before anything else! This holding-of-its-breath in
Wagnerian pathos, this disinclination to have done with an intense
feeling, this terrifying habit of dwelling on a situation in which every
instant almost chokes one.----

Was Wagner a musician at all? In any case he was something else to _a much
greater degree_--that is to say, an incomparable _histrio_, the greatest
mime, the most astounding theatrical genius that the Germans have ever
had, our _scenic artist par excellence_. He belongs to some other sphere
than the history of music, with whose really great and genuine figure he
must not be confounded. Wagner _and_ Beethoven--this is blasphemy--and above
all it does not do justice even to Wagner.... As a musician he was no more
than what he was as a man, he _became_ a musician, he _became_ a poet,
because the tyrant in him, his actor's genius, drove him to be both.
Nothing is known concerning Wagner, so long as his dominating instinct has
not been divined.

Wagner was _not_ instinctively a musician. And this he proved by the way
in which he abandoned all laws and rules, or, in more precise terms, all
style in music, in order to make what he wanted with it, _i.e._, a
rhetorical medium for the stage, a medium of expression, a means of
accentuating an attitude, a vehicle of suggestion and of the
psychologically picturesque. In this department Wagner may well stand as
an inventor and an innovator of the first order--_he increased the powers
of speech __ of music to an incalculable degree_--he is the Victor Hugo of
music as language, provided always we allow that under certain
circumstances music may be something which is not music, but
speech--instrument--_ancilla dramaturgica_. Wagner's music, _not_ in the
tender care of theatrical taste, which is very tolerant, is simply bad
music, perhaps the worst that has ever been composed. When a musician can
no longer count up to three, he becomes "dramatic," he becomes
"Wagnerian"....

Wagner almost discovered the magic which can be wrought even now by means
of music which is both incoherent and _elementary_. His consciousness of
this attains to huge proportions, as does also his instinct to dispense
entirely with higher law and _style_. The elementary factors--sound,
movement, colour, in short, the whole sensuousness of music--suffice.
Wagner never calculates as a musician with a musician's conscience, all he
strains after is effect, nothing more than effect. And he knows what he
has to make an effect upon!--In this he is as unhesitating as Schiller was,
as any theatrical man must be; he has also the latter's contempt for the
world which he brings to its knees before him. A man is an actor when he
is ahead of mankind in his possession of this one view, that everything
which has to strike people as true, must not be true. This rule was
formulated by Talma: it contains the whole psychology of the actor, it
also contains--and this we need not doubt--all his morality. Wagner's music
is never true.

--But it is supposed to be so: and thus everything is as it should be. As
long as we are young, and Wagnerites into the bargain, we regard Wagner as
rich, even as the model of a prodigal giver, even as a great landlord in
the realm of sound. We admire him in very much the same way as young
Frenchmen admire Victor Hugo--that is to say, for his "royal liberality."
Later on we admire the one as well as the other for the opposite reason:
as masters and paragons in economy, as _prudent_ amphitryons. Nobody can
equal them in the art of providing a princely board with such a modest
outlay.--The Wagnerite, with his credulous stomach, is even sated with the
fare which his master conjures up before him. But we others who, in books
as in music, desire above all to find _substance_, and who are scarcely
satisfied with the mere representation of a banquet, are much worse off.
In plain English, Wagner does not give us enough to masticate. His
recitative--very little meat, more bones, and plenty of broth--I christened
"_alla genovese_": I had no intention of flattering the Genoese with this
remark, but rather the _older recitativo_, the _recitativo secco_. And as
to Wagnerian _leitmotif_, I fear I lack the necessary culinary
understanding for it. If hard pressed, I might say that I regard it
perhaps as an ideal toothpick, as an opportunity of ridding one's self of
what remains of one's meal. Wagner's "arias" are still left over. But now
I shall hold my tongue.




9.


Even in his general sketch of the action, Wagner is above all an actor.
The first thing that occurs to him is a scene which is certain to produce
a strong effect, a real _actio_,(10) with a basso-relievo of attitudes; an
_overwhelming_ scene, this he now proceeds to elaborate more deeply, and
out of it he draws his characters. The whole of what remains to be done
follows of itself, fully in keeping with a technical economy which has no
reason to be subtle. It is not Corneille's public that Wagner has to
consider, it is merely the nineteenth century. Concerning the "actual
requirements of the stage" Wagner would have about the same opinion as any
other actor of to-day, a series of powerful scenes, each stronger than the
one that preceded it,--and, in between, all kinds of _clever_ nonsense. His
first concern is to guarantee the effect of his work; he begins with the
third act, he _approves_ his work according to the quality of its final
effect. Guided by this sort of understanding of the stage, there is not
much danger of one's creating a drama unawares. Drama demands _inexorable_
logic: but what did Wagner care about logic? Again I say, it was not
Corneille's public that he had to consider; but merely Germans! Everybody
knows the technical difficulties before which the dramatist often has to
summon all his strength and frequently to sweat his blood: the difficulty
of making the _plot_ seem necessary and the unravelment as well, so that
both are conceivable only in a certain way, and so that each may give the
impression of freedom (the principle of the smallest expenditure of
energy). Now the very last thing that Wagner does is to sweat blood over
the plot; and on this and the unravelment he certainly spends the smallest
possible amount of energy. Let anybody put one of Wagner's "plots" under
the microscope, and I wager that he will be forced to laugh. Nothing is
more enlivening than the dilemma in "Tristan," unless it be that in the
"Mastersingers." Wagner is _no_ dramatist; let nobody be deceived on this
point. All he did was to love the word "drama"--he always loved fine words.
Nevertheless, in his writings the word "drama" is merely a
misunderstanding (--_and_ a piece of shrewdness: Wagner always affected
superiority in regard to the word "opera"--), just as the word "spirit" is
a misunderstanding in the New Testament.--He was not enough of a
psychologist for drama; he instinctively avoided a psychological plot--but
how?--by always putting idiosyncrasy in its place.... Very modern--eh? Very
Parisian! very decadent!... Incidentally, the _plots_ that Wagner knows how
to unravel with the help of dramatic inventions, are of quite another
kind. For example, let us suppose that Wagner requires a female voice. A
whole act without a woman's voice would be impossible! But in this
particular instance not one of the heroines happens to be free. What does
Wagner do? He emancipates the oldest woman on earth, Erda. "Step up, aged
grandmamma! You have got to sing!" And Erda sings. Wagner's end has been
achieved. Thereupon he immediately dismisses the old lady. "Why on earth
did you come? Off with you! Kindly go to sleep again!" In short, a scene
full of mythological awe, before which the Wagnerite _wonders_ all kinds
of things....

--"But the substance of Wagner's texts! their mythical substance, their
eternal substance"--Question: how is this substance, this eternal substance
tested? The chemical analyst replies: Translate Wagner into the real, into
the modern,--let us be even more cruel, and say into the bourgeois! And
what will then become of him?--Between ourselves, I have tried the
experiment. Nothing is more entertaining, nothing more worthy of being
recommended to a picnic-party, than to discuss Wagner dressed in a more
modern garb: for instance Parsifal, as a candidate in divinity, with a
public-school education (--the latter, quite indispensable _for pure_
foolishness). What _surprises_ await one! Would you believe it, that
Wagner's heroines one and all, once they have been divested of the heroic
husks, are almost indistinguishable from Mdme. Bovary!--just as one can
conceive conversely, of Flaubert's being _well able_ to transform all his
heroines into Scandinavian or Carthaginian women, and then to offer them
to Wagner in this mythologised form as a libretto. Indeed, generally
speaking, Wagner does not seem to have become interested in any other
problems than those which engross the little Parisian decadents of to-day.
Always five paces away from the hospital! All very modern problems, all
problems which are at home _in big cities!_ do not doubt it!... Have you
noticed (it is in keeping with this association of ideas) that Wagner's
heroines never have any children?--They _cannot_ have them.... The despair
with which Wagner tackled the problem of arranging in some way for
Siegfried's birth, betrays how modern his feelings on this point actually
were.--Siegfried "emancipated woman"--but not with any hope of
offspring.--And now here is a fact which leaves us speechless: Parsifal is
Lohengrin's father! How ever did he do it?--Ought one at this juncture to
remember that "chastity works miracles"?...

_Wagnerus dixit princeps in castitate auctoritas._




10.


And now just a word _en passant_ concerning Wagner's writings: they are
among other things a school of _shrewdness_. The system of procedures of
which Wagner disposes, might be applied to a hundred other cases,--he that
hath ears to hear let him hear. Perhaps I may lay claim to some public
acknowledgment, if I put three of the most valuable of these procedures
into a precise form.

Everything that Wagner _cannot_ do is bad.

Wagner could do much more than he does; but his strong principles prevent
him.

Everything that Wagner _can_ do, no one will ever be able to do after him,
no one has ever done before him, and no one must ever do after him. Wagner
is godly.

These three propositions are the quintessence of Wagner's writings;--the
rest is merely--"literature".

--Not every kind of music hitherto has been in need of literature; and it
were well, to try and discover the actual reason of this. Is it perhaps
that Wagner's music is too difficult to understand? Or did he fear
precisely the reverse--that it was too easy,--that people might _not
understand it with sufficient difficulty_?--As a matter of fact, his whole
life long, he did nothing but repeat one proposition: that his music did
not mean music alone! But something more! Something immeasurably more!...
"_Not music alone_"--_no_ musician would speak in this way. I repeat,
Wagner could not create things as a whole; he had no choice, he was
obliged to create things in bits, with "motives," attitudes, formulae,
duplications, and hundreds of repetitions, he remained a rhetorician in
music,--and that is why he was at bottom _forced_ to press "this means"
into the foreground. "Music can never be anything else than a means": this
was his theory, but above all it was the only _practice_ that lay open to
him. No musician however thinks in this way.--Wagner was in need of
literature, in order to persuade the whole world to take his music
seriously, profoundly, "because it _meant_ an infinity of things", all his
life he was the commentator of the "Idea."--What does Elsa stand for? But
without a doubt, Elsa is "the unconscious _mind of the people_" (--"when I
realised this, I naturally became a thorough revolutionist"--).

Do not let us forget that, when Hegel and Schelling were misleading the
minds of Germany, Wagner was still young: that he guessed, or rather fully
grasped, that the only thing which Germans take seriously is--"the
idea,"--that is to say, something obscure, uncertain, wonderful; that among
Germans lucidity is an objection, logic a refutation. Schopenhauer
rigorously pointed out the dishonesty of Hegel's and Schelling's
age,--rigorously, but also unjustly, for he himself, the pessimistic old
counterfeiter, was in no way more "honest" than his more famous
contemporaries. But let us leave morality out of the question, Hegel is a
_matter of taste_.... And not only of German but of European taste!... A taste
which Wagner understood!--which he felt equal to! which he has
immortalised!--All he did was to apply it to music--he invented a style for
himself, which might mean an "infinity of things,"--he was _Hegel's_ heir....
Music as "Idea."--

And how well Wagner was understood!--The same kind of man who used to gush
over Hegel, now gushes over Wagner, in his school they even _write_
Hegelian.(11) But he who understood Wagner best, was the German youthlet.
The two words "infinity" and "meaning" were sufficient for this: at their
sound the youthlet immediately began to feel exceptionally happy. Wagner
did _not_ conquer these boys with music, but with the "idea":--it is the
enigmatical vagueness of his art, its game of hide-and-seek amid a hundred
symbols, its polychromy in ideals, which leads and lures the lads. It is
Wagner's genius for forming clouds, his sweeps and swoops through the air,
his ubiquity and nullibiety--precisely the same qualities with which Hegel
led and lured in his time!--Moreover in the presence of Wagner's
multifariousness, plenitude and arbitrariness, they seem to themselves
justified--"saved". Tremulously they listen while the _great symbols_ in
his art seem to make themselves heard from out the misty distance, with a
gentle roll of thunder, and they are not at all displeased if at times it
gets a little grey, gruesome and cold. Are they not one and all, like
Wagner himself, on _quite intimate terms_ with bad weather, with German
weather! Wotan is their God, but Wotan is the God of bad weather.... They
are right, how could these German youths--in their present condition,--miss
what we others, we _halcyonians_, miss in Wagner? _i.e._: _la gaya
scienza_; light feet, wit, fire, grave, grand logic, stellar dancing,
wanton intellectuality, the vibrating light of the South, the calm
sea--perfection....




11.


--I have mentioned the sphere to which Wagner belongs--certainly not to the
history of music. What, however, does he mean historically?--_The rise of
the actor in music_: a momentous event which not only leads me to think
but also to fear.

In a word: "Wagner and Liszt." Never yet have the "uprightness" and
"genuineness" of musicians been put to such a dangerous test. It is
glaringly obvious: great success, mob success is no longer the achievement
of the genuine,--in order to get it a man must be an actor!--Victor Hugo and
Richard Wagner--they both prove one and the same thing: that in declining
civilisations, wherever the mob is allowed to decide, genuineness becomes
superfluous, prejudicial, unfavourable. The actor, alone, can still kindle
_great_ enthusiasm.--And thus it is his _golden age_ which is now
dawning,--his and that of all those who are in any way related to him. With
drums and fifes, Wagner marches at the head of all artists in declamation,
in display and virtuosity. He began by convincing the conductors of
orchestras, the scene-shifters and stage-singers, not to forget the
orchestra:--he "delivered" them from monotony.... The movement that Wagner
created has spread even to the land of knowledge: whole sciences
pertaining to music are rising slowly, out of centuries of scholasticism.
As an example of what I mean, let me point more particularly to
_Riemann's_ services to rhythmics; he was the first who called attention
to the leading idea in punctuation--even for music (unfortunately he did so
with a bad word; he called it "phrasing").--All these people, and I say it
with gratitude, are the best, the most respectable among Wagner's
admirers--they have a perfect right to honour Wagner. The same instinct
unites them with one another; in him they recognise their highest type,
and since he has inflamed them with his own ardour they feel themselves
transformed into power, even into great power. In this quarter, if
anywhere, Wagner's influence has really been _beneficent_. Never before
has there been so much thinking, willing, and industry in this sphere.
Wagner endowed all these artists with a new conscience: what they now
exact and _obtain_ from themselves, they had never exacted before Wagner's
time--before then they had been too modest. Another spirit prevails on the
stage since Wagner rules there the most difficult things are expected,
blame is severe, praise very scarce,--the good and the excellent have
become the rule. Taste is no longer necessary, nor even is a good voice.
Wagner is sung only with ruined voices: this has a more "dramatic" effect.
Even talent is out of the question. Expressiveness at all costs, which is
what the Wagnerian ideal--the ideal of decadence--demands, is hardly
compatible with talent. All that is required for this is virtue--that is to
say, training, automatism, "self-denial". Neither taste, voices, nor
gifts, Wagner's stage requires but one thing: _Germans!_... The definition
of a German: an obedient man with long legs.... There is a deep significance
in the fact that the rise of Wagner should have coincided with the rise of
the "Empire": both phenomena are a proof of one and the same
thing--obedience and long legs.--Never have people been more obedient, never
have they been so well ordered about. The conductors of Wagnerian
orchestras, more particularly, are worthy of an age, which posterity will
one day call, with timid awe, the _classical age of war_.

Wagner understood how to command; in this respect, too, he was a great
teacher. He commanded as a man who had exercised an inexorable will over
himself--as one who had practised lifelong discipline: Wagner was, perhaps,
the greatest example of self-violence in the whole of the history of art
(--even Alfieri, who in other respects is his next-of-kin, is outdone by
him. The note of a Torinese).




12.


This view, that our actors have become more worthy of respect than
heretofore, does not imply that I believe them to have become less
dangerous.... But who is in any doubt as to what I want,--as to what the
_three requisitions_ are concerning which my wrath and my care and love of
art, have made me open my mouth on this occasion?

_That the stage should not become master of the arts._

_That the actor should not become the corrupter of the genuine._

_That music should not become an art of lying._



POSTSCRIPT


The gravity of these last words allows me at this point to introduce a few
sentences out of an unprinted essay which will at least leave no doubt as
to my earnestness in regard to this question. The title of this essay is:
"What Wagner has cost us."

One pays dearly for having been a follower of Wagner. Even to-day a vague
feeling that this is so, still prevails. Even Wagner's success, his
triumph, did not uproot this feeling thoroughly. But formerly it was
strong, it was terrible, it was a gloomy hate throughout almost
three-quarters of Wagner's life. The resistance which he met with among us
Germans cannot be too highly valued or too highly honoured. People guarded
themselves against him as against an illness,--not with arguments--it is
impossible to refute an illness,--but with obstruction, with mistrust, with
repugnance, with loathing, with sombre earnestness, as though he were a
great rampant danger. The aesthetes gave themselves away when out of three
schools of German philosophy they waged an absurd war against Wagner's
principles with "ifs" and "fors"--what did he care about principles, even
his own!--The Germans themselves had enough instinctive good sense to
dispense with every "if" and "for" in this matter. An instinct is weakened
when it becomes conscious: for by becoming conscious it makes itself
feeble. If there were any signs that in spite of the universal character
of European decadence there was still a modicum of health, still an
instinctive premonition of what is harmful and dangerous, residing in the
German soul, then it would be precisely this blunt resistance to Wagner
which I should least like to see underrated. It does us honour, it gives
us some reason to hope: France no longer has such an amount of health at
her disposal. The Germans, these _loiterers par excellence_, as history
shows, are to-day the most backward among the civilised nations of Europe;
this has its advantages,--for they are thus relatively the youngest.

One pays dearly for having been a follower of Wagner. It is only quite
recently that the Germans have overcome a sort of dread of him,--the desire
to be rid of him occurred to them again and again.(12) Does anybody
remember a very curious occurrence in which, quite unexpectedly towards
the end, this old feeling once more manifested itself? It happened at
Wagner's funeral. The first Wagner Society, the one in Munich, laid a
wreath on his grave with this inscription, which immediately became
famous: "Salvation to the Saviour!" Everybody admired the lofty
inspiration which had dictated this inscription, as also the taste which
seemed to be the privilege of the followers of Wagner. Many also, however
(it was singular enough), made this slight alteration in it: "Salvation
_from_ the Saviour"--People began to breathe again--

One pays dearly for having been a follower of Wagner. Let us try to
estimate the influence of this worship upon culture. Whom did this
movement press to the front? What did it make ever more and more
pre-eminent?--In the first place the layman's arrogance, the arrogance of
the art-maniac. Now these people are organising societies, they wish to
make their taste prevail, they even wish to pose as judges _in rebus
musicis et musicantibus_. Secondly: an ever increasing indifference
towards severe, noble and conscientious schooling in the service of art,
and in its place the belief in genius, or in plain English, cheeky
dilettantism (--the formula for this is to be found in the
_Mastersingers_). Thirdly, and this is the worst of all: _Theatrocracy_--,
the craziness of a belief in the pre-eminence of the theatre, in the right
of the theatre to rule supreme over the arts, over Art in general.... But
this should be shouted into the face of Wagnerites a hundred times over:
that the theatre is something lower than art, something secondary,
something coarsened, above all something suitably distorted and falsified
for the mob. In this respect Wagner altered nothing: Bayreuth is grand
Opera--and not even good opera.... The stage is a form of Demolatry in the
realm of taste, the stage is an insurrection of the mob, a _plebiscite_
against good taste.... The case of Wagner proves this fact: he captivated
the masses--he depraved taste, he even perverted our taste for opera!--

One pays dearly for having been a follower of Wagner. What has
Wagner-worship made out of spirit? Does Wagner liberate the spirit? To him
belong that ambiguity and equivocation and all other qualities which can
convince the uncertain without making them conscious of why they have been
convinced. In this sense Wagner is a seducer on a grand scale. There is
nothing exhausted, nothing effete, nothing dangerous to life, nothing that
slanders the world in the realm of spirit, which has not secretly found
shelter in his art, he conceals the blackest obscurantism in the luminous
orbs of the ideal. He flatters every nihilistic (Buddhistic) instinct and
togs it out in music; he flatters every form of Christianity, every
religious expression of decadence. He that hath ears to hear let him hear:
everything that has ever grown out of the soil of impoverished life, the
whole counterfeit coinage of the transcendental and of a Beyond found its
most sublime advocate in Wagner's art, not in formulae (Wagner is too
clever to use formulae), but in the persuasion of the senses which in their
turn makes the spirit weary and morbid. Music in the form of Circe ... in
this respect his last work is his greatest masterpiece. In the art of
seduction "Parsifal" will for ever maintain its rank as a stroke of
genius.... I admire this work. I would fain have composed it myself. Wagner
was never better inspired than towards the end. The subtlety with which
beauty and disease are united here, reaches such a height, that it casts
so to speak a shadow upon all Wagner's earlier achievements: it seems too
bright, too healthy. Do ye understand this? Health and brightness acting
like a shadow? Almost like an objection?... To this extent are we already
pure fools.... Never was there a greater Master in heavy hieratic
perfumes--Never on earth has there been such a connoisseur of paltry
infinities, of all that thrills, of extravagant excesses, of all the
feminism from out the vocabulary of happiness! My friends, do but drink
the philtres of this art! Nowhere will ye find a more pleasant method of
enervating your spirit, of forgetting your manliness in the shade of a
rosebush.... Ah, this old magician, mightiest of Klingsors; how he wages war
against us with his art, against us free spirits! How he appeals to every
form of cowardice of the modern soul with his charming girlish notes!
There never was such a _mortal hatred_ of knowledge! One must be a very
cynic in order to resist seduction here. One must be able to bite in order
to resist worshipping at this shrine. Very well, old seducer! The cynic
cautions you--_cave canem_....

One pays dearly for having been a follower of Wagner. I contemplate the
youthlets who have long been exposed to his infection. The first
relatively innocuous effect of it is the corruption of their taste. Wagner
acts like chronic recourse to the bottle. He stultifies, he befouls the
stomach. His specific effect: degeneration of the feeling for rhythm. What
the Wagnerite calls rhythmical is what I call, to use a Greek metaphor,
"stirring a swamp." Much more dangerous than all this, however, is the
corruption of ideas. The youthlet becomes a moon-calf, an "idealist". He
stands above science, and in this respect he has reached the master's
heights. On the other hand, he assumes the airs of a philosopher, he
writes for the _Bayreuth Journal_; he solves all problems in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Master. But the most ghastly thing of
all is the deterioration of the nerves. Let any one wander through a large
city at night, in all directions he will hear people doing violence to
instruments with solemn rage and fury, a wild uproar breaks out at
intervals. What is happening? It is the disciples of Wagner in the act of
worshipping him.... Bayreuth is another word for a Hydro. A typical telegram
from Bayreuth would read _bereits bereut_ (I already repent). Wagner is
bad for young men; he is fatal for women. What medically speaking is a
female Wagnerite? It seems to me that a doctor could not be too serious in
putting this alternative of conscience to young women; either one thing or
the other. But they have already made their choice. You cannot serve two
Masters when one of these is Wagner. Wagner redeemed woman; and in return
woman built Bayreuth for him. Every sacrifice, every surrender: there was
nothing that they were not prepared to give him. Woman impoverishes
herself in favour of the Master, she becomes quite touching, she stands
naked before him. The female Wagnerite, the most attractive equivocality
that exists to-day: she is the incarnation of Wagner's cause: his cause
triumphs with her as its symbol.... Ah, this old robber! He robs our young
men: he even robs our women as well, and drags them to his cell.... Ah, this
old Minotaur! What has he not already cost us? Every year processions of
the finest young men and maidens are led into his labyrinth that he may
swallow them up, every year the whole of Europe cries out "Away to Crete!
Away to Crete!"....




SECOND POSTSCRIPT


It seems to me that my letter is open to some misunderstanding. On certain
faces I see the expression of gratitude; I even hear modest but merry
laughter. I prefer to be understood here as in other things. But since a
certain animal, _the worm_ of Empire, the famous _Rhinoxera_, has become
lodged in the vineyards of the German spirit, nobody any longer
understands a word I say. The _Kreus-Zeitung_ has brought this home to me,
not to speak of the _Litterarisches Centralblatt_. I have given the
Germans the deepest books that they have ever possessed--a sufficient
reason for their not having understood a word of them.... If in this essay I
declare war against Wagner--and incidentally against a certain form of
German taste, if I seem to use strong language about the cretinism of
Bayreuth, it must not be supposed that I am in the least anxious to
glorify any other musician. Other musicians are not to be considered by
the side of Wagner. Things are generally bad. Decay is universal. Disease
lies at the very root of things. If Wagner's name represents the ruin of
music, just as Bernini's stands for the ruin of sculpture, he is not on
that account its cause. All he did was to accelerate the fall,--though we
are quite prepared to admit that he did it in a way which makes one recoil
with horror from this almost instantaneous decline and fall to the depths.
He possessed the ingenuousness of decadence: this constituted his
superiority. He believed in it. He did not halt before any of its logical
consequences. The others hesitated--that is their distinction. They have no
other. What is common to both Wagner and "the others" consists in this:
the decline of all organising power, the abuse of traditional means,
without the capacity or the aim that would justify this. The counterfeit
imitation of grand forms, for which nobody nowadays is strong, proud,
self-reliant and healthy enough, excessive vitality in small details;
passion at all costs; refinement as an expression of impoverished life,
ever more nerves in the place of muscle. I know only one musician who
to-day would be able to compose an overture as an organic whole: and
nobody else knows him.(13) He who is famous now, does not write better
music than Wagner, but only less characteristic, less definite music:--less
definite, because half measures, even in decadence, cannot stand by the
side of completeness. But Wagner was complete, Wagner represented thorough
corruption, Wagner has had the courage, the will, and the conviction for
corruption. What does Johannes Brahms matter?... It was his good fortune to
be misunderstood by Germany; he was taken to be an antagonist of
Wagner--people required an antagonist!--But he did not write necessary
music, above all he wrote too much music!--When one is not rich one should
at least have enough pride to be poor!... The sympathy which here and there
was meted out to Brahms, apart from party interests and party
misunderstandings, was for a long time a riddle to me, until one day
through an accident, almost, I discovered that he affected a particular
type of man. He has the melancholy of impotence. His creations are not the
result of plenitude, he thirsts after abundance. Apart from what he
plagiarises, from what he borrows from ancient or exotically modern
styles--he is a master in the art of copying,--there remains as his most
individual quality a _longing_.... And this is what the dissatisfied of all
kinds, and all those who yearn, divine in him. He is much too little of a
personality, too little of a central figure.... The "impersonal," those who
are not self-centred, love him for this. He is especially the musician of
a species of dissatisfied women. Fifty steps further on, and we find the
female Wagnerite--just as we find Wagner himself fifty paces ahead of
Brahms.--The female Wagnerite is a more definite, a more interesting, and
above all, a more attractive type. Brahms is touching so long as he dreams
or mourns over himself in private--in this respect he is modern;--he becomes
cold, we no longer feel at one with him when he poses as the child of the
classics.... People like to call Brahms Beethoven's heir: I know of no more
cautious euphemism--All that which to-day makes a claim to being the grand
style in music is on precisely that account either false to us or false to
itself. This alternative is suspicious enough: in itself it contains a
casuistic question concerning the value of the two cases. The instinct of
the majority protests against the alternative; "false to us"--they do not
wish to be cheated;--and I myself would certainly always prefer this type
to the other ("False to itself"). This is _my_ taste.--Expressed more
clearly for the sake of the "poor in spirit" it amounts to this: Brahms
_or_ Wagner.... Brahms is _not_ an actor.--A very great part of other
musicians may be summed up in the concept Brahms--I do not wish to say
anything about the clever apes of Wagner, as for instance Goldmark: when
one has "The Queen of Sheba" to one's name, one belongs to a
menagerie,--one ought to put oneself on show.--Nowadays all things that can
be done well and even with a master hand are small. In this department
alone is honesty still possible. Nothing, however, can cure music as a
whole of its chief fault, of its fate, which is to be the expression of
general physiological contradiction,--which is, in fact, to be modern.

The best instruction, the most conscientious schooling, the most thorough
familiarity, yea, and even isolation, with the Old Masters,--all this only
acts as a palliative, or, more strictly speaking, has but an illusory
effect, because the first condition of the right thing is no longer in our
bodies; whether this first condition be the strong race of a Handel or the
overflowing animal spirits of a Rossini. Not everyone has the right to
every teacher: and this holds good of whole epochs.--In itself it is not
impossible that there are still remains of stronger natures, typical
unadapted men, somewhere in Europe: from this quarter the advent of a
somewhat belated form of beauty and perfection, even in music, might still
be hoped for. But the most that we can expect to see are exceptional
cases. From the rule, that corruption is paramount, that corruption is a
fatality,--not even a God can save music.




EPILOGUE


And now let us take breath and withdraw a moment from this narrow world
which necessarily must be narrow, because we have to make enquiries
relative to the value of _persons_. A philosopher feels that he wants to
wash his hands after he has concerned himself so long with the "Case of
Wagner". I shall now give my notion of what is _modern_. According to the
measure of energy of every age, there is also a standard that determines
which virtues shall be allowed and which forbidden. The age either has the
virtues of _ascending_ life, in which case it resists the virtues of
degeneration with all its deepest instincts. Or it is in itself an age of
degeneration, in which case it requires the virtues of declining life,--in
which case it hates everything that justifies itself, solely as being the
outcome of a plenitude, or a superabundance of strength. AEsthetic is
inextricably bound up with these biological principles: there is decadent
aesthetic, and _classical_ aesthetic,--"beauty in itself" is just as much a
chimera as any other kind of idealism.--Within the narrow sphere of the
so-called moral values, no greater antithesis could be found than that of
_master-morality_ and the morality of _Christian_ valuations: the latter
having grown out of a thoroughly morbid soil. (--The gospels present us
with the same physiological types, as do the novels of Dostoiewsky), the
master-morality ("Roman," "pagan," "classical," "Renaissance"), on the
other hand, being the symbolic speech of well-constitutedness, of
_ascending_ life, and of the Will to Power as a vital principle.
Master-morality _affirms_ just as instinctively as Christian morality
_denies_ ("God," "Beyond," "self-denial,"--all of them negations). The
first reflects its plenitude upon things,--it transfigures, it embellishes,
it _rationalises_ the world,--the latter impoverishes, bleaches, mars the
value of things; it _suppresses_ the world. "World" is a Christian term of
abuse. These antithetical forms in the optics of values, are _both_
necessary: they are different points of view which cannot be circumvented
either with arguments or counter-arguments. One cannot refute
Christianity: it is impossible to refute a diseased eyesight. That people
should have combated pessimism as if it had been a philosophy, was the
very acme of learned stupidity. The concepts "true" and "untrue" do not
seem to me to have any sense in optics.--That, alone, which has to be
guarded against is the falsity, the instinctive duplicity which _would
fain_ regard this antithesis as no antithesis at all: just as Wagner
did,--and his mastery in this kind of falseness was of no mean order. To
cast side-long glances at master-morality, at _noble_ morality (--Icelandic
saga is perhaps the greatest documentary evidence of these values), and at
the same time to have the opposite teaching, the "gospel of the lowly,"
the doctrine of the _need_ of salvation, on one's lips!... Incidentally, I
admire the modesty of Christians who go to Bayreuth. As for myself, I
could _not_ endure to hear the sound of certain words on Wagner's lips.
There are some concepts which are too good for Bayreuth ... What?
Christianity adjusted for female Wagnerites, perhaps _by_ female
Wagnerites--for, in his latter days Wagner was thoroughly _feminini
generis_--? Again I say, the Christians of to-day are too modest for me....
If Wagner were a Christian, then Liszt was perhaps a Father of the
Church!--The need of _salvation_, the quintessence of all Christian needs,
has nothing in common with such clowns; it is the most straightforward
expression of decadence, it is the most convincing and most painful
affirmation of decadence, in sublime symbols and practices. The Christian
wishes _to be rid_ of himself. _Le moi est toujours haissable._ Noble
morality, master-morality, on the other hand, is rooted in a triumphant
saying of yea to _one's self_,--it is the self-affirmation and
self-glorification of life; it also requires sublime symbols and
practices; but only "because its heart is too full." The whole of
beautiful art and of great art belongs here; their common essence is
gratitude. But we must allow it a certain instinctive repugnance _to
decadents_, and a scorn and horror of the latter's symbolism: such things
almost prove it. The noble Romans considered Christianity as a _foeda
superstitio_: let me call to your minds the feelings which the last German
of noble taste--Goethe--had in regard to the cross. It is idle to look for
more valuable, more _necessary_ contrasts.(14)

But the kind of falsity which is characteristic of the Bayreuthians is not
exceptional to-day. We all know the hybrid concept of the Christian
gentleman. This _innocence_ in contradiction, this "clean conscience" in
falsehood, is rather modern _par excellence_, with it modernity is almost
defined. Biologically, modern man represents a _contradiction of values_,
he sits between two stools, he says yea and nay in one breath. No wonder
that it is precisely in our age that falseness itself became flesh and
blood, and even genius! No wonder _Wagner_ dwelt amongst us! It was not
without reason that I called Wagner the Cagliostro of modernity.... But all
of us, though we do not know it, involuntarily have values, words,
formulae, and morals in our bodies, which are quite _antagonistic_ in their
origin--regarded from a physiological standpoint, we are _false_.... How
would a _diagnosis of the modern soul_ begin? With a determined incision
into this agglomeration of contradictory instincts, with the total
suppression of its antagonistic values, with vivisection applied to its
most _instructive_ case. To philosophers the "Case of Wagner" is a
_windfall_--this essay, as you observe, was inspired by gratitude.
